Using Local AI Models with Visual Studio Code's "AI Toolkit" Extension

This guide provides instructions on how to set up and use local AI models (via Ollama) with the "AI Toolkit for Visual Studio Code" extension.

1. Prerequisites

You have Ollama installed on your system.
You have pulled the local AI models you wish to use (e.g., ollama pull llama3).

2. Start and Test the Ollama Server

First, start the Ollama server. This will make your local models available through a local web address.

ollama serve

By default, the server runs at http://localhost:11434.

To test the connection outside of VS Code, run the following command in your terminal:

curl http://localhost:11434

You should see a response from the Ollama server, typically "Ollama is running".

3. Configure the AI Toolkit Extension in VS Code

Open the AI Toolkit

Look for the AI Toolkit icon in the Activity Bar on the left sidebar of VS Code. It may look like a brain or a model icon.
If you don't see it, go to the Extensions view (Ctrl+Shift+X), search for "AI Toolkit," and make sure it is installed and enabled.
Click the icon to open the AI Toolkit view, where you will see sections like Model Catalog and My Models.

Add Your Ollama Endpoint

In the My Resources section, click on the "Start with a free model on GitHub" button. This will open a "Model Catalog" tab.
Scroll to the bottom of the "Model Catalog" to the "Bring your own model" section and click the "+ Add your own model" button.
When prompted, provide the endpoint URL for your Ollama server:

http://localhost:11434

The extension will then ask for additional information (like an API key). This information is not necessary for a local Ollama setup, so you can enter placeholder text (e.g., "bogus") to proceed.

4. Add Your Local AI Models

Now that the endpoint is configured, you can add your locally available models.

In the My Models section of the AI Toolkit view, click the + button.
From the quick pick menu, select Ollama.
Choose "Select models from Ollama library".
The extension will connect to your Ollama server and display a list of all the models you have pulled locally (e.g., llama3, phi3, mistral).
Select the model(s) you wish to add to the toolkit. You can give them a custom display name if prompted.

5. Test Your Model in the Playground

Once a model is added, you can test it to ensure it's working correctly.

Right-click on the model you just added in the My Models section and select "Try in Playground".
In the Playground chat interface, make sure your Ollama model is selected from the dropdown menu.
Type a prompt (e.g., "Explain this Python function") and check the response. The output will be generated by your local model, running completely offline.

6. Use in Other Features

With your local model successfully integrated, you can now use it with other features of the AI Toolkit, such as:

Prompt Engineering: Create and test prompts.
Batch Evaluation: Run multiple prompts against your model.
Agents/Tools: Integrate your model into custom agents for tasks like code generation or debugging.

While the AI Toolkit is excellent for experiments and playground use, you can copy the outputs for inline code assistance or use it alongside other VS Code extensions for a complete AI-assisted workflow.